support custom queue for the scheduler (#2781)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-scheduling/2779-support-custom-queue-for-the-scheduler/README.md

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Provide an interface so that users can implement a custom queue of scheduler.

Reviewer: which kind of user? end user or custom scheduler developers?

Author: custom scheduler developers, updated this part to show it explicitly.

> With such, users can build their custom queue implementation at will, and plumb into

Reviewer: which scheduler? the default scheduler? IIUC, the intent is to easy the development of custom schedulers.

The phrasing of this paragraph makes it seem that you are proposing an API to configure the queue at runtime, which is not the case.

Author: The developers will get a scheduler binary with the custom queue, then they can replace the default scheduler binary with it, or run it as the secondary scheduler of the k8s.

the scheduler seamlessly. This can satisfy the business needs such as sophisticated
pods sorting and internal queuing mechanics.

## Motivation

The current internal queue implementation ([scheduling_queue.go#PriorityQueue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ee459b8969ed2abfed79a07d4ac9d41f13f18ce6/pkg/scheduler/internal/queue/scheduling_queue.go#L126))
works for most cases, but the limited interfaces exposure makes it hard to
implement a scheduler plugin for sophisticated requirements.

One requirement in terms of multi-tenancy support:  
There are many pods from 2 users (userA and userB), and the target is to ensure resource
usage (E.g. userA gets x CPUs) ratio between userA and userB is 1:1. Sorting the pods by

> the resource usage in `Less` function doesn't work properly, because the resource usage for

Reviewer: Can you share a sample design of how you would implement a queue that satisfies this requirement?

Perhaps we can put the interface in a different place so that you don't have to implement the entire queue. I would like to see Alternative proposals.

Author: To resolve the issue that mentioned by me, I will build some sub-queues of the queue, one sub-queue for one user. Once schedule wants to pop a pod from the queue, the queue will go through the sub-queues, select the most under-used, and pop a pod from it. 

The purpose of this solution is to expose the entire queue, so that scheduler developer can control all the details in a queue, and we needn't expose any new function/structs/etc in the future. This is used to save our effort. :)

userA/userB will be updated dynamically once a pod is selected and bound, while the
algorithm (heapsort) that used by the current queue to get the next pods depends on static
data.

Other requirements come from current semi-exposed functions/parameters:
For example, the interval of function flushUnschedulableQLeftover, although configurable,

> is immutable after it gets initialized. A requirement is to adjust the interval dynamically

Reviewer: What is the use case for this?

The intend of the flush is to make sure we are not leaving pods without scheduling retries. Ideally, it shouldn't exist and retries should entirely be based on cluster events. But realistically, it's hard to catch all events.
But depending on your use case, you might just want a mechanism to trigger the retry of *certain* pods.

Author: This case is used to show that there are many possible customer cases that we cannot handle with the current internal queue, and we need a solution for customers to implement the queue at their will. This is also the reason that why we want the customer the implement the whole queue.

based on the pressure of pending workloads (e.g., length of queue or other metrics).

Given that the business needs may vary greatly, it'd be desirable to provide a replaceable
`SchedulerQueue` interface and plumbing mechanics. So that the developers can
implement their custom queue implementation, while the upstream maintainers focus
on keeping the core small and extensible, and thus only maintain the internal queue piece.

### Goals

1. Support custom queue implementation of the scheduler.

> 2. Roll out the design gradually. In phase 1, keep current internal queue implementation

Reviewer: Please clarify: is it a goal to change the default queueing plugin? If not, please add a Non Goal. Regardless, point 2 needs is not very clear on the intent.

Author: This feature is only for the [scheduling_queue.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ee459b8969ed2abfed79a07d4ac9d41f13f18ce6/pkg/scheduler/internal/queue/scheduling_queue.go), no plugin will be touched. Do we need to plugin here?

intact.

### Non-Goals

Support custom rules for pod selection in the current internal queue of scheduler.

## Proposal

Provide an interface like current scheduler plugins, users can provide a

> custom queue of scheduler and register it, then the kubernetes

Reviewer: at which time? build time, configuration time, runtime?

Author: At build time, the custom queue will be part of the scheduler binary after building.  Readme updated.

scheduler will use this custom queue for pod management.

This is an extension of the current scheduler plugins, users can control
more details of the scheduler with this enhancement.

Pros:  
Users can get full control of the pod queuing logic, they can pop/re-queue/backoff pods with
custom logic.

The scheduler plugins design is enhanced, the custom queue and the extension

> points can work together to meet more requests.

Reviewer: s/requests/requirements

Author: a typo?

Cons:  
Users need to understand the details of the current queue which has 13
functions now, it is not easy to implement a custom queue.

### Risks and Mitigations

A poor-implemented queue may not function well, in both functionality and performance.
But the default scheduler works as before and thus won't be impacted.

## Design Details

The scheduler internal queue, as its name implies, was originally implemented for internal
usage. Due to that, some structs (like cache, Option) are not designed for external extension,
and the internal queue is initialized with specified parameters like LessFunc,
SharedInformerFactory, and Option by [factory.go#create](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/f1f0183d2bbcde33024b2a05d6f39df32f11e037/pkg/scheduler/factory.go#L172). Although refactoring the internal queuing mechanics to be reusable/extensible is the eventual
goal, we'd like to approach that gradually, and thus is not the goal of phase 1 of this design.
In phase 1, we'd like to exercise the idea of "a replaceable scheduler queue" in a "minimal viable product"
manner.

A practical design for phase 1 is described as below:

> 1. Make `SchedulingQueue` a public interface. Users can choose to implement their own queue.

Reviewer: The interface definition should be part of the KEP

Author: There is no change for the interface `SchedulingQueue`, just make it from private to publish, this is why its details are not listed. To avoid confusing, provide following message for more details:

1. Make `SchedulingQueue` a public interface which is private now in ([scheduling_queue.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ee459b8969ed2abfed79a07d4ac9d41f13f18ce6/pkg/scheduler/internal/queue/scheduling_queue.go#L126)). Users can choose to implement their own queue.

2. Provide a new function `WithCustomQueue`, so users can register the custom queue with this
function like other plugins.

    ```go
         command := app.NewSchedulerCommand(
             app.WithPlugin(coscheduling.Name, coscheduling.New),
             ......
       +     app.WithCustomQueue(customQueue.New),
         )
    ```

> 3. The registered custom queue will be recorded by updated `Registry` struct.

Reviewer: This sounds like implementation detail that can be left for code reviews. I would probably ask to not touch the registry. But again, we don't need to discuss this in the KEP.

Author: Merged items 3/4 into one item, remove the code details, the new message is:

3. The registered custom queue will be passed to the scheduler if it exists, or the current internal queue will be used.

    ```go
      type Registry struct {
          Pf          map[string]PluginFactory
          CustomQueue schedulingQueue.SchedulingQueue
      }
    ```

> 4. In function `(c *Configurator) create()`, custom queue will be passed to the scheduler

Reviewer: Also irrelevant for the KEP

Author: As mentioned above, merged it with item 3 and removed the code details.

if it exists, or the current internal queue will be used.

    ```go
      - podQueue := internalqueue.NewSchedulingQueue(
      -         lessFn,
      +
      + var podQueue framework.SchedulingQueue
      + if c.registry.CustomQueue != nil {
      +         podQueue = c.registry.CustomQueue
      + } else {
      +         podQueue = &internalqueue.PriorityQueue{}
      + }
      + podQueue.Init(...)
    ```

5. Basic inputs for queue's initialization will not be changed, a new method `Init` is added in
the interface `SchedulingQueue`, users must implement it.

    ```go
      + func (p *PriorityQueue) Init(
      +        lessFn framework.LessFunc,
      +        informerFactory informers.SharedInformerFactory,
      +        opts ...framework.Option,
      + ) {
    ```

> To get started with the implementation, an easy way is to copy the codes of the current

Reviewer: Irrelevant for the KEP

Author: this part was removed.

  - [ ] (R) Minimum Two Week Window for GA e2e tests to prove flake free
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria is in place
  - [ ] (R) [all GA Endpoints](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/pull/1806) must be hit by [Conformance Tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/blob/master/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/conformance-tests.md) 
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review completed
- [ ] (R) Production readiness review approved
- [ ] "Implementation History" section is up-to-date for milestone
- [ ] User-facing documentation has been created in [kubernetes/website], for publication to [kubernetes.io]
- [ ] Supporting documentation—e.g., additional design documents, links to mailing list discussions/SIG meetings, relevant PRs/issues, release notes

<!--
**Note:** This checklist is iterative and should be reviewed and updated every time this enhancement is being considered for a milestone.
-->

[kubernetes.io]: https://kubernetes.io/
[kubernetes/enhancements]: https://git.k8s.io/enhancements
[kubernetes/kubernetes]: https://git.k8s.io/kubernetes
[kubernetes/website]: https://git.k8s.io/website

## Summary

> Provide an interface so that user can implement a custom queue of scheduler,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Provide an interface so that users can implement a custom queue of scheduler.
```

> with such a queue, user can sort the pods in the queue with specified rules 
> and get some functions that are not supported now.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With such, users can build their custom queue implementation at will, and plumb into
the scheduler seamlessly. This can satisfy the business needs such as sophisticated
pods sorting and internal queuing mechanics.
```

## Motivation

> The current queue (PriorityQueue in pkg\scheduler\internal\queue\scheduling_queue.go) 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The current internal queue implementation ([scheduling_queue.go#PriorityQueue](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/ee459b8969ed2abfed79a07d4ac9d41f13f18ce6/pkg/scheduler/internal/queue/scheduling_queue.go#L126)).
```

> for pod selection in the scheduler is good enough for most cases, while it cannot handle 
> all the requests even with a custom scheduler based on the kubernetes scheduler plugins.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
works for most cases, but the limited interfaces exposure makes it hard to
implement a scheduler plugin for sophisticated requirements.
```

> One example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One requirement in terms of multi-tenancy support:
```

There are many pods from 2 users (userA and userB), and the target is to ensure resource
usage (E.g. userA gets x CPUs) ratio between userA and userB is 1:1. Sorting the pods by

> the resource usage in Less function cannot work, because the resource usage for 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the resource usage in `Less` function doesn't work properly, because the resource usage for 
```

userA/userB will be updated dynamically once a pod is selected and bound, while the 
algorithm (heapsort) that used by the current queue to get the next pods depends on static
data.

Another example:
The interval of function flushUnschedulableQLeftover is hard coded to 30 seconds, user

> cannot change it.

Reviewer 2: It's now customizable, so no longer a valid motivation.

Reviewer 2: So, can you compile at least one more motivation here?

Author: Update the message to:

Another requirement in terms of custom function support:  
For example, the interval of function flushUnschedulableQLeftover cannot be updated dynamically, while
user want it to be shorter or longer at different times as shorter interval can get pods to be scheduled
faster and longer one can get less logs flushed.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, that's a fair point.

> These issues can be resolved if user can implement the queue by themselves, then user
> can get what they want easily, and code maintainer needn't handle various requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Given that the business needs may vary greatly, it'd be good to provide a replaceable
`SchedulerQueue` interface and plumbing mechanics. So that the developers can
implement their custom queue implementation, while the upstream maintainers focus
on keeping the core small and extensible, and thus only maintain the internal queue piece.
```

### Goals

> Support custom queue of the scheduler.

Reviewer 2: Support custom queue implementation of the scheduler

### Non-Goals

> Support custom rules for pod selection in the current queue of scheduler

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Support custom rules for pod selection in the current internal queue of scheduler.
```

## Proposal

Provide an interface like current scheduler plugins, users can provide a
custom queue of scheduler and register it, then the kubernetes

> scheduler will use this custom queue for pod selection.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
scheduler will use this custom queue for pod management.
```

This is an extension of the current scheduler plugins, users can control
more details of the scheuler with this enhancement.

Pros:  

> Users can get full control of the pod selection logic in the queue, they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Users can get full control of the pod queuing logic, they
```

> can select pods with custom logic.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can pop/re-queue/backoff pods with custom logic.
```

The scheduler plugins design is enhanced, the custom queue and the extension
points can work together to meet more requests.

Cons:  
Users need to understand the details of the current queue which has 13
functions now, it is not easy to implement a custom queue.

### Risks and Mitigations

If custom queue is not enabled or provided, the current queue will work as

> before, no other users will be impacted.

Reviewer 2: A poor-implemented queue may not function well, in both functionality and performance.
But the default scheduler works as before and thus won't be impacted.

## Design Details

The codes will be updated as following:

1. User implements a custom queue with the interface SchedulingQueue,
the name is myQueue, and registers it

>   ```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```go
```

Author: I removed the space. Why adding `go`? A typo?

Reviewer 2: that's for pretty formatting.

Author: Thanks for this suggestion. 
Downloaded an extention for markdownlint to ensure the markdown format can be followed.

	command := app.NewSchedulerCommand(
		app.WithPlugin(coscheduling.Name, coscheduling.New),

>                         …...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                        ......
```

> 	+	app.WithCustomQueue(myQueue.New),

Reviewer 3: I think It maybe  better to make the CustomQueue as a plugin and register it as other plugins like:
```go
	command := app.NewSchedulerCommand(
		app.WithPlugin(coscheduling.Name, coscheduling.New),
	+	app.WithPlugin(myQueue.Name, myQueue.New),
)

Author: Thanks for the suggestion, please see my answer below, it explains why `WithPlugin` is not re-used.

	)
  ```

2. The registered custom queue will be recorded by updated Registry struct.

  ```
  type Registry struct {
    Pf          map[string]PluginFactory
    CustomQueue schedulingQueue.SchedulingQueue
  }
  ```

3. In function (c *Configurator) create(), pass the custom queue to the scheduler
if it exists.
  ```
  if c.registry.CustomQueue != nil {
      podQueue = c.registry.CustomQueue
  } else {
      podQueue = schedulingQueue.NewSchedulingQueue()
  }
   ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Can you also add here to explain how it explains with other internal scheduler structures like Cache, Assumed state, NominatedPods, etc. Any other interfaces are needed? and how. What's the risk here?

Author: A new interface Init will be aded to handle the initialization parameters from the k8s framework, it is used to replace the old function NewPriorityQueue, the logic inside them are same.
Packages queue and heap will be exposed to end users, then users can access/use them and the mentioned internal scheduler structures. 

```
4. Basic inputs for queue's initialization will not be changed, a new interface `Init` is added in
SchedulingQueue, users must implement it.
-func NewPriorityQueue(
+func (p *PriorityQueue) Init(
 	lessFn framework.LessFunc,
 	informerFactory informers.SharedInformerFactory,
 	opts ...Option,
)
5. For the scheduler internal packages under ([internal] (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/b6c75bee15e150628fcc240ab32dba6190d254e4/pkg/scheduler/internal)), queue and heap will be moved out of this folder so that users can access and use the structures inside them, cache and parallelize will not be touched.
```

Reviewer 2: > Packages queue and heap will be exposed to end users, then users can access/use them and the mentioned internal scheduler structures.

I don't think I like this idea. The internal structure should be restricted for internal usage only.

Can you list the blockers (due to missing plumbing mechanics) that a pure out-of-tree implementation won't work properly?

Also, I'm also thinking about how `Option` can be more general and thus more usable for an out-of-tree queue implementation. Right now the internal `priorityQueueOptions` are fixed data structures, and hence not extensible.

Author: OK, let's keep queue and heap in the original location.  Removed `5` from the document.

The current blockers in my mind are `SchedulingQueue` and `PriorityQueueOptions` (maybe there will be more, I will write some codes to verify it), and I'm planning to move them to `pkg\scheduler\framework\interface.go` so that the users can access them, this is a right loaction for you?

Author: close this thread as there is same thread below.

### Test Plan

> 

Reviewer 2: Please refer to other KEPs to fill this section as well as others.

Author: Updated with 

```
- **Unit Tests**: All core changes must be covered by unit tests.
- **Integration Tests**: One integration test for the custom queue.
- **Benchmark Tests**: The performance benchmark test result is same as before if custom queue is not used.
```

There are many pods from 2 users (userA and userB), and the target is to ensure resource
usage (E.g. userA gets x CPUs) ratio between userA and userB is 1:1. Sorting the pods by
the resource usage in `Less` function doesn't work properly, because the resource usage for
userA/userB will be updated dynamically once a pod is selected and bound, while the
algorithm (heapsort) that used by the current queue to get the next pods depends on static
data.

Other requirements come from current semi-exposed functions/parameters:
For example, the interval of function flushUnschedulableQLeftover, although configurable,
is immutable after it gets initialized. A requirement is to adjust the interval dynamically
based on the pressure of pending workloads (e.g., length of queue or other metrics).

Given that the business needs may vary greatly, it'd be desirable to provide a replaceable
`SchedulerQueue` interface and plumbing mechanics. So that the developers can
implement their custom queue implementation, while the upstream maintainers focus
on keeping the core small and extensible, and thus only maintain the internal queue piece.

### Goals

Support custom queue implementation of the scheduler.

> 

Reviewer 2: Add a bullet: Roll out the design gradually. In phase 1, keep current internal queue implementation intact.

Author: added.

### Non-Goals

Support custom rules for pod selection in the current internal queue of scheduler.

## Proposal

Provide an interface like current scheduler plugins, users can provide a
custom queue of scheduler and register it, then the kubernetes
scheduler will use this custom queue for pod management.

This is an extension of the current scheduler plugins, users can control
more details of the scheduler with this enhancement.

Pros:  
Users can get full control of the pod queuing logic, they can pop/re-queue/backoff pods with
custom logic.

The scheduler plugins design is enhanced, the custom queue and the extension
points can work together to meet more requests.

Cons:  
Users need to understand the details of the current queue which has 13
functions now, it is not easy to implement a custom queue.

### Risks and Mitigations

A poor-implemented queue may not function well, in both functionality and performance.
But the default scheduler works as before and thus won't be impacted.

## Design Details

> The current internal queue is coupled with `cache`, `Option` and other implementations

Reviewer 2: The scheduler _internal_ queue, as its name implies, was originally implemented for internal usage. Due to that, some structs (like `cache`, `Option`) are not designed for external extension, and the internal queue is initialized with specified parameters like `LessFunc`, `SharedInformerFactory`,
and `Option` by [factory.go#create](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/f1f0183d2bbcde33024b2a05d6f39df32f11e037/pkg/scheduler/factory.go#L172)). Although refactoring the internal queuing mechanics to be reusable/extensible is the eventual goal, we'd like to approach that gradually, and thus is not the goal of phase 1 of this design. In phase 1, we'd like to exercise the idea of "a replaceable scheduler queue" in a "minimal viable product" manner.

Author: updated.

(e.g., the queue is initialized with specified parameters like `LessFunc`, `SharedInformerFactory`,
and `Option` by [factory.go#create](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/f1f0183d2bbcde33024b2a05d6f39df32f11e037/pkg/scheduler/factory.go#L172)),
this solution will not decouple them as this has no impact on the goal of custom queue,
and such logics can be enhanced in the future on demand.

Some of the items like `SchedulingQueue`, `Option` that are only used by the internal
queue now will be exposed at [interface.go](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/fb9cafc99be94a73d9b92545164dbf336bbd230a/pkg/scheduler/framework/interface.go),
users of custom queue can access them.

To implement a custom queue, what an user needs to do is to copy the codes of the current
internal queue (e.g., scheduling_queue.go), update some logics to get the custom queue,
and then pass the custom queue to the scheduler like the plugins. With this way, user's

> logics will override the logics of the current internal queue.

Reviewer 2: Remove these 2 paragraphs as they are custom implementation details (or suggestions).

Author: removed.

> The codes will be updated as following:

Reviewer 2: A practical design for phase 1 is described as below:

> 1. Make the interface `SchedulingQueue` as a public one, so that users can implement it

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Make `SchedulingQueue` a public interface. Users can choose to implement their own queue.
```

for the custom queue.

> 2. Provide a new function `WithCustomQueue`, users can register the custom queue with this

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Provide a new function `WithCustomQueue`, so users can register the custom queue with this
```

       +     app.WithCustomQueue(customQueue.New),
         )
    ```

3. The registered custom queue will be recorded by updated `Registry` struct.

    ```go
      type Registry struct {
          Pf          map[string]PluginFactory
          CustomQueue schedulingQueue.SchedulingQueue
      }
    ```

4. In function `(c *Configurator) create()`, custom queue will be passed to the scheduler
if it exists, or the current internal queue will be used.

    ```go
      - podQueue := internalqueue.NewSchedulingQueue(
      -         lessFn,
      +
      + var podQueue framework.SchedulingQueue
      + if c.registry.CustomQueue != nil {
      +         podQueue = c.registry.CustomQueue
      + } else {
      +         podQueue = &internalqueue.PriorityQueue{}
      + }
      + podQueue.Init(...)
    ```

5. Basic inputs for queue's initialization will not be changed, a new method `Init` is added in
the interface `SchedulingQueue`, users must implement it.

    ```go
      + func (p *PriorityQueue) Init(
      +        lessFn framework.LessFunc,
      +        informerFactory informers.SharedInformerFactory,
      +        opts ...framework.Option,
      + ) {
    ```

> 

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, you can ass a stanza about the implementation practice/suggestion here:

```
To get started with the implementation, an easy way is to copy the codes of the current
internal queue (i.e., scheduling_queue.go), and then update the logic in-place to adapt to
your business needs  (it's very like how some out-of-tree PostFilter plugin refers to the defaultpreemption plugin).
With the custom queue handle, you can pass it to the scheduler like the plugins.
Following this way, the user's custom scheduler queue will override the upstream internal queue.
```

Author: added.

### Test Plan

- **Unit Tests**: All core changes must be covered by unit tests.

> - **Integration Tests**: One integration test for the custom queue.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Integration Tests**: At least one integration test to craft a custom queue to exercise an end-to-end flow.
```

- **Benchmark Tests**: The performance benchmark test result is same as before if custom queue is not used.

### Graduation Criteria

> 

Reviewer 2: Describe the plan of how to roll it out here. Like phase 1, phase 2, etc.

Author: This document is for the solution of phase 1 (provide interface to implement custom queue), and there is no solution details for phase 2 (refine the codes, decouple the queue with some structures), should we mention the `Graduation Criteria` of phase 2 in this document?

Reviewer: I think you should have *some* idea of what phase 2 would look like before we proceed.

Author: For phase 2, what we will do is
1. refine the codes, make the interface simple and easy to use, decouple this feature with other parts of the scheduler
2. refine some designs with user's feedback

Update the message as following:
```
 #### Beta -> GA Graduation

+- Only necessary interface and structs are exposed to users.
 - Allowing time for feedback to ensure that the new interface sufficiently expresses users requirements.
```

Author: For phase 2, what we will do is

refine the codes, make the interface simple and easy to use, decouple this feature with other parts of the scheduler
refine some designs with user's feedback
Update the message as following:

<!--
**Note:** *Not required until targeted at a release.*

Define graduation milestones.

These may be defined in terms of API maturity, or as something else. The KEP
should keep this high-level with a focus on what signals will be looked at to
determine graduation.

Consider the following in developing the graduation criteria for this enhancement:
- [Maturity levels (`alpha`, `beta`, `stable`)][maturity-levels]
- [Deprecation policy][deprecation-policy]

Clearly define what graduation means by either linking to the [API doc
definition](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/kubernetes-api/#api-versioning)
or by redefining what graduation means.

In general we try to use the same stages (alpha, beta, GA), regardless of how the
functionality is accessed.

[maturity-levels]: https://git.k8s.io/community/contributors/devel/sig-architecture/api_changes.md#alpha-beta-and-stable-versions
[deprecation-policy]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/using-api/deprecation-policy/

Below are some examples to consider, in addition to the aforementioned [maturity levels][maturity-levels].

#### Alpha

> - Feature implemented behind a feature flag

Reviewer 2: I guess we don't need a feature gate here. But we can mention the maturity level by using the terms alpha, beta, etc.

Author: Updated as following, is this OK?
```
### Graduation Criteria

#### Alpha -> Beta Graduation

- Users can implement their own custom queues.
- No user complaints regarding correctness.

#### Beta -> GA Graduation

- Allowing time for feedback to ensure that the new interface sufficiently expresses users requirements.
```

- Initial e2e tests completed and enabled

#### Beta

- Gather feedback from developers and surveys

> - Complete features A, B, C

Reviewer 2: Polish this as well as other uncompleted ones.

Author: Removed this part, and add some details about the `Graduation Criteria`, mentioned by above answers.

implement their custom queue implementation, while the upstream maintainers focus
on keeping the core small and extensible, and thus only maintain the internal queue piece.

> This KEP is not used to change the internal queue, or queue sorting plugin, quite the contrary,

Reviewer: This should go as Non-Goal

Author: The above message is a little long for `Non-Goals`, how about updating the readme as following?

Add message `Enable scheduler developers to change the internal queue, or queue sorting plugin` in the `Non-Goals` section to show that it is not our goal.

Keep the orignal message in the `Motivation` section to let others know the details of our design.

1. User implements a custom queue with the interface SchedulingQueue,
the name is myQueue, and registers it

```
	command := app.NewSchedulerCommand(
		app.WithPlugin(coscheduling.Name, coscheduling.New),
                        ......
	+	app.WithCustomQueue(myQueue.New),
	)
```

2. The registered custom queue will be recorded by updated Registry struct.

```
  type Registry struct {
    Pf          map[string]PluginFactory
    CustomQueue schedulingQueue.SchedulingQueue
  }
```

3. In function (c *Configurator) create(), pass the custom queue to the scheduler
if it exists.
```
  if c.registry.CustomQueue != nil {
      podQueue = c.registry.CustomQueue
  } else {
      podQueue = schedulingQueue.NewSchedulingQueue()
  }
```

4. Basic inputs for queue's initialization will not be changed, a new interface `Init` is added in
SchedulingQueue, users must implement it.

```
-func NewPriorityQueue(
+func (p *PriorityQueue) Init(
 	lessFn framework.LessFunc,
 	informerFactory informers.SharedInformerFactory,
 	opts ...Option,
)
```

> 5. For the scheduler internal packages under ([internal] (https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/tree/b6c75bee15e150628fcc240ab32dba6190d254e4/pkg/scheduler/internal)), queue and heap will be moved out of this folder so that users can access and use the structures inside them, cache and parallelize will not be touched.

Reviewer 2: remove the blank between text and URL link.

Again, I don't think it's feasible to move queue and heap out.

Author: Item `5` was removed, queue and heap will be internal packages as before.

Author: The current blockers in my mind are SchedulingQueue and PriorityQueueOptions (maybe there will be more, I will write some codes to verify it), and I'm planning to move them to pkg\scheduler\framework\interface.go so that the users can access them, this is a right loaction for you?

Author: Checked with codes, following items in the current queue need to be exposed, and I'm planning to move them into `pkg\scheduler\framework\interface.go`

```
type PreEnqueueCheck func(pod *v1.Pod) bool

type PriorityQueueOptions struct {}

type Option func(*PriorityQueueOptions)

type SchedulingQueue interface {}
```

An alternative is to enhance the current queue to meet some requests. The drawback
is that we cannot handle all the potential requests as the effort is big, we should

> give the ball to the users, and they can do what they want.

Reviewer: I disagree with this statement.

I'm more in favor of keeping the interface small with clear use cases.

Author: The target of his KEP is to enable scheduler developers to implement their own logic to manage the order the pods. We can expose part of the interface for some known cases now, we will have to expose more interfaces in the future to handle new cases as developers' requests are un-preditable, this needs effort and maybe a new KEP. To expose the whole interface, we can handle the potentail requests by this KEP, needn't extra effort in the future.

Another alternative is to suspend a job and don't let it go unless the resource
sharing policy will not be broken. The drawback is that all the pods in the job will
be impacted, it cannot handle the case that only some pods need to be touched.

Another alternative is to make the pod that will break the resource sharing policy with
`Unschedulable`. The drawback is that making such a decision needs the status of all other

> pods, the logic is complex, and the performance will be impacted.

Reviewer: In the proposal, don't you have to know the status of all pods during sorting? It looks like the latency is moving from one place to another.

Author: Oh, the `status` here is not clear. I update it to `The drawback is that making such a decision needs to know whether other
pods can run or not, ......`. To mark a pod as `Unschedulable`, the alternative needs to predict whether the competitor pods can run or not, this is complex.

In my proposal, the pods for different users will be put into different queues, and once the scheduler want to pop a pod, it will select the most under-used queue and pop one, the scheduler needn't care about other pods in other queues, logic is simple, there is no latency.

Reviewer: Can't you keep the same information about usage ratios in the PreFilter plugin? The latency should be similar.
